A concern in the credit
card market that
emerged well before
the financial crisis,
was the fact that
consumers tended to bear
high delinquency fees for
missing payments on credit,
missing their credit
card payments,
and that financial
institutions tended
to without fair warning,
increase the interest rates
that consumers owed them in
a way that felt unfair
to particular consumers.
These are problems that
Elizabeth Warren highlighted in
2007 in her call
for a Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau.
Warren used to
really terrific analogy
comparing a toaster
to consumer credit,
or home mortgages for example,
and pointed out that while
there were institutions in
place to make sure that
your toaster didn't explode,
there were far less institutions
in place to make sure that
you weren't receiving a mortgage
that you wouldn't
be able to repay,
or you weren't being given
credit card debt at
a certain price,
without realizing that
that price didn't
include all of
the various fees and
interest rate hikes
that you would
experience over the lifetime
of your credit card account.
In the aftermath of
the financial crisis,
there was substantial
political ability
to navigate this sphere,
and impose new regulations on
the financial institutions
that had been
responsible for
the calamity of the crisis.
One of the first pieces
of legislation that
Barack Obama signed
into office in 2009,
was aimed exactly at addressing
the problems in
the credit card market,
the credit card accountability,
responsibility, and
Disclosure Act.
The nature of the CARD Act was
to provide greater
transparency for
consumers on the actual price
of the credit that they
would have to pay.
This eliminated or reduced
the ability of banks to charge
very high late fees for
consumers who miss
their credit card payments,
and also limited the ability of
financial institutions
to increase
interest rates
significantly without
providing fair warning
to customers.
The idea behind these
interventions was based on
the simple observation that
Elizabeth Warren made,
that card contracts
had grown increasingly
complicated in the decades
leading up to their crisis.
They went from being on
average a page in the 1970s,
to 40 pages by the
time the crisis hit.
This meant that
whatever expectation you had
for consumers to read
a single page contract,
even the most sophisticated
among us would never read
a 40 page credit
card contract and
understand and
appreciate the terms
associated with their borrowing.
This means that what you actually
pay attention to as consumers,
is the teaser rate that's
offered to you that's listed on
even the outside of
the envelope which gives you
a credit card solicitation.
That's what you think
the price of credit is,
without realizing
that that teaser rate
is going to expire very quickly,
without realizing that if you are
delinquent on
your credit card payment,
you're going to bear high fees.
Financial institutions said that
this regulation that aimed
at protecting consumers
from having to pay a price for
credit that was significantly
higher than what
they anticipated,
would actually hurt
precisely that
consumers that are aimed to help.
Jamie Diamond the CEO of
JP Morgan Chase said that in
response to the CARD Act,
his bank would
simply stop offering
credit cards to 15 percent
of its customers.
Because what the CARD
Act had done is,
it restricted
JP Morgan's ability to
reprice the cost of
credit to consumers
once aspects of
consumer's risk profile
became known to
the financial institution.
A for example, a consumer
who is late in making
repayments is riskier than
a consumer who pays on time.
In reality, the
empirical evidence on
the CARD acts suggests
that contrary
to this expectations set
by JP Morgan and
other financial institutions,
that the CARD Act
would harm consumers.
It actually helped
consumers quite
significantly decreasing
the total cost of
credit for consumers by
around $13 billion annually.
Empirical evidence
shows no suggestion
that other kinds of
bank fees increase
in order to cover
the costs of the CARD Act,
or that consumer if
that credit supply was
decreased significantly for
consumers expect in
ways that the CARD Act
anticipated and in fact
desired by for example,
decreasing the tendency of
credit card companies, and
financial institutions,
to advertise credit cards
to college students,
without ascertaining
that they had
any ability to repay this credit,
and trapping them in
expensive cycles of debt.
As we've discussed,
interchange fees
became a significantly large cost
of operating for merchants.
So in the aftermath of
the crisis we did
several things to
help decrease the payment costs
associated for consumers.
Things like overdraft protection
or the CARD Act.
But what we also did was try and
restrict these fees that
are born by merchants.
This was also in the guise
of consumer protection.
The idea behind the Durbin
Amendment which was
added to Dodd Frank by
Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois,
was that it would decrease
interchange fees
that merchants bore,
and as a result
decrease the costs for
consumers of retail goods,
since consumers are the ones
who inherently bear
higher interchange expense
that merchants have to pay.
Interestingly,
although initial ideas
a brown interchange
regulation focused on
credit interchange
were interchange rates
tend to be higher.
Eventually, the Durbin
Amendment targeted
only debit interchange and left
credit interchange
fees unregulated.
This is a strange regulatory
intervention given that if
anything we view debit cards
as a safer payment instrument,
and credit cards as
a more dangerous payment
instrument because
they coupled transacting
and consumer borrowing.
The idea the reason
that Durbin offered for
this intervention being focused
on the debit market was that,
in the aftermath of
the recession there
was a concern that
restrictions in
the credit market or
further restrictions
in the credit market,
would restrict credit supply
at a moment in time
when the recovery
was barely underway,
and it was important for
consumers and businesses
to be able to get
access to these funds
for borrowing.
In reality though,
the decision to focus
on debit rather than
credit interchange,
made the Durbin Amendment a
rather complicated
regulatory intervention
in an undesirable one from
the perspective of consumers.
What banks did in the aftermath
of Durbin was that,
they decreased
credit debit card rewards
and all but eliminated them,
and significantly increased
credit card rewards
in order to convince
consumers to use
credit cards which were
left unregulated by
this intervention.
Since credit interchange was
still very profitable to
financial institutions,
they wanted to encourage
all consumers to
use credit instruments
and discourage
the use of debit
instruments that tend
to be associated now after
Durbin with lower
interchange revenue for banks.
In theory, financial
institutions get
revenue from checking
accounts in one of two ways.
The first is that they can charge
consumers a monthly maintenance
fee on their account,
for even opening
a checking account
and serving it for that consumer.
The second is they generate
revenue from interchange every
time consumers use
their debit cards
as a means of purchase.
What the Durbin Amendment did is,
it restricted the ability
of banks to generate
profits from debit interchange,
by capping debit interchange fees
at around $0.22 per transaction,
when previously
a $100 debit expense
would generate an
interchange revenue
of around two dollars for a bank.
This decrease in revenue
banks first tried to combat,
by charging exactly those
customers who use to
transact with their debit card
and generate interchange revenue,
a fee for transacting with
their debit card directly.
They proposed
a five dollar fee on
consumers who use
their debit card as
a means of purchase in
any month when they
use their debit card,
this is something
that for example
Bank of America proposed.
In response, large groups
of protesters and
the Occupy Wall Street
Movement burned
Bank of America debit cards
in Times Square,
and Bank of America
quickly walked
back from this proposed fee,
and instead what
large financial institutions
like Bank of America
and Wells Fargo and JP Morgan
did in response to Durbin,
was they increased
the account fees that they
charge consumers to
generate this lost revenue.
So prior to Durbin,
around 80 percent of customers at
large financial institutions had
access to a free
checking account.
This means a checking
account that has
a zero dollar maintenance fee
no matter the size
of the account.
Following the Durbin Amendment,
banks put a extra fee
on consumers for
having an account on
the order of let's say
five dollars a month
for consumers,
who didn't have a sufficiently
large account balance
or didn't have
direct deposit in
their accounts that
generated revenue
in other sources.
This again is
an unintended consequence
of Durbin and a regressive one,
because the only consumers
who are bearing
these higher account fees
are those who
don't have sufficiently
large account balances.
All in all, estimates suggests
that consumers as a group lose
around $3.5 billion from
the Durbin Amendment,
and that this particular
regulation ended up
hurting precisely the consumers
at sought to help
since these higher account fees
are born disproportionately
by low income and
less financially
sophisticated consumers.
The Durbin Amendment case study
illustrates the effect of
interchange regulation
that economists who study
this particular two-sided market
long suggested would occur.
In two-sided markets,
the idea doing
cost-based regulation like
the Durbin Amendment,
which required that
the Federal Reserve promulgate
rules that didn't
allow merchants to
be charged a cost that was higher
than the actual cost of
processing the transaction,
are a little bit complicated.
Because remember, that these are
two-sided markets
which means that
the intermediaries
generate profits
both from the merchants
and from the consumers.
So loss leader pricing
where one side
of the market is subsidized
at the expense of the other,
might mean that one side
of the market in
a totally competitive world with
no monopoly market
power concerns,
bears a cost that feels
elevated relative to
the true or actual processing
cost in this space.
This is something that's
been studied extensively by
economists like
Nobel Laureate John troll